hundreds more killed in Gaza since
Friday's un Security Council vote for
more Aid what practical impact will the
resolution have and how can Aid get to
2.3 million people living under constant
attack among destroyed infrastructure in
a live Battle Zone this is Inside
Story
hello and welcome to the program I'm D
abuga celebrations among diplomats and
officials after the United Nations
security Council on Friday finally
passed a motion to allow more Aid into
Gaza but that mood wasn't shared in the
strip Israel's attacks have continued
raining down Western supplied bombs on
an area where many of it's two 2.3
million people don't have the food or
water they need to survive the war
pursued by Israel's far-right government
has killed more than 20,000 Palestinians
in just over two months more than 50,000
have been maned or injured and nearly
all gaza's population has been forced to
move so what does the UN resolution for
more aid mean in reality and what is the
reality of those in Gaza today both its
people and those trying to help them
we'll be asking our guests this and more
in a few moments but first this report
from Kum
[Music]
Sharif staff at this charity
organization know meals they are
preparing won't be enough to feed all
people queuing up
here in Rafa a city in southern Gaza
tens of thousands of displaced
Palestinians depend on food
handouts they wait for hours to get a
single meal to lovech the
day honestly people's situation is very
very difficult we are heading towards a
very severe famine may God protect us so
that people do not die of
hunger but not everyone is lucky in a
city housing most of gaza's 1.9 million
displaced people food water and shelter
are hard to come
by Israel's continuous air strikes and
its expanding ground operations have
isolated the strip and stopped its
businesses stores have no stocks and
people have neither work nor money to
buy basic Goods they depend on
humanitarian aid but only a trickle is
getting
in we stand in a long queue for about 2
hours or an hour and sometimes we don't
get any food and sometimes we
do the chaty says it's feeding about
10,000 people each day but stocks are
running
out
we suffer from food shortages there is
no food lentil are out of stock as well
as peas beans and Bulger wheat all the
foods have run out at the market people
need food water medicine but none is
available everything is cut off perhaps
today is the last day we can provide
food for the
people un agencies are warning of a risk
of widespread famine more than half a
million Palestinians a quarter of gaza's
population face what experts classify as
catastrophic levels of
hunger we are fed up this is not alive I
swear such a war has never happened
before now there is real hunger my
children are dying of
hunger Aid coming from Rafa at the
border with Egypt is subject to Israeli
inspection another crossing point with
Israel has just been approved whatever
can enter Gaza is restricted by Israel
with deliver held up by border
checks Israeli bombardment has destroyed
much of its infrastructure making the
delivery of Aid a logistical
nightmare the UN Secretary General
blames Israel's Relentless bombing for
preventing humanitarian aid from
entering the besieged
strip the real problem is that the way
Israel is conducting this offensive is
creating massive obstacles to the
distribution of humanitarian Aid inside
Gaza I urge the Israeli authorities to
lift restrictions on Commercial activity
immediately in Gaza people in hospitals
witness some of the most desperate
scenes most are barely operating with no
fuel power medicine and even doctors as
Israel continues its attacks on medical
facilities across the territory
exensions a un Security Council
resolution passed on Friday is meant to
scale up the delivery of Aid relief for
diplomats and officials in New York with
the coming weeks will tell whether it
brings any respite for
Palestinians ulsum Sharif for Inside
Story okay let's now bring in our guests
joining us from Khan yunes in Gaza is
the resident Mansour Shan from Hamman we
have Ahmed bam who's the regional media
and Communications adviser at the
Norwegian Refugee Council joining us
from Vienna is Le attenberg who's a
senior adviser with the Arab Renaissance
for democracy and development and he was
also the former Chief of Ethics at unwa
thank you for joining us thanks for your
time Mansour um from Gaza since the
resolution which calls on parties to the
conflict to allow and facilitate the
flow of humanitarian Aid to Gaza through
land sea and air routes tell us what
you're seeing on the ground has there
been a scaleup of humanitarian
Aid
hello everyone um thank you for having
me I think it's too early to tell um
let's uh let's observe what happens here
inside the strip over the next three to
four days to see what kind of um impact
that resolution had on the ground here
um currently uh the issue is that
there's a lack of security there's a
lack of safety in all of Raza strip uh
I'm currently here in Nas hospital I've
been here for the last 70 days uh
together with 30,000 other refugees in
one medical complex and until now I have
only seen come to NAS Hospital which is
the biggest operating hospital here in
after the destruction of asifa around 28
trucks and one fuel truck that's it so
uh I think that we need um much much
more when it comes to providing AIDS and
providing repealed hospitals and fuel
supplies in in order to ensure that the
lives of 2.3 million Palestinian
civilians continue to be sustainable
mansur I hear what you're saying about
observing over the next few days the
impact that that resolution may or may
not have but one of the points mentioned
in it was the opening of kamam Abu Salam
that border crossing that is crucial are
you hearing at all whether that border
crossing has been
opened I haven't seen any any
information on that personally it might
have been however what we did hear about
was two days ago the IDF um uh hit with
an air strike three of the people or
four of the people which are trying to
operate Abu and killed all killed all
four um uh I I honestly don't have any
information on that right now okay we
will be following up on that uh in the
next few days but just one more with you
man before I bring in my other guests um
look the Israeli ambassador to the UN
has said that this resolution is
unnecessary and it's disconnected from
reality and according to him Israel is
already allowing Aid deliveries at the
required scale now clearly what you're
saying is that's not what's happening in
Gaza but tell us how much Aid um is
actually entering on a daily basis what
do you know about
this uh we know that less than 5,000
trucks have entered intoa strip since
the start of this conflict so you are
talking about over the last 75 days um
you know less than less than 70 trucks a
day uh normally gazza's trip during
non-war times gets at least 500 trucks
uh of imports inside uh however this is
not when um over 80% of the population
is displaced uh thousands injured uh and
uh and many in need of urgent medic
supplies and uh and fuel supplies in
order to ensure that electricity
continues to run here um I think it's
more of a PR stunt on the behalf of the
Israelis what happened earlier on the
RAF border even the trucks that came in
a lot of them after being searched by
the Israelis were emptied we only
received two or three pallets of
supplies many of the supplies that we
received after being Ted by the Israelis
had expired food products many of them
had things we don't need
like masks gloves and L for our
dead okay man thank you for the time
being Lex tackenberg thanks for your
patience let me bring you in here look
speaking of f the resolution that was
passed at the security Council also
States it says rather that states that
are not party to the conflict are
welcome to permit free passage of
humanitarian relief now this
particularly refers to Egypt and uh and
the RAF border crossing from your
experience how does it work on the ra
side does everything have to be
coordinated with the
Israelis absolutely the uh there was
quite a discussion in the lead up to the
latest resolution uh about handing over
uh control over the um passing of eight
into Gaza from uh the Egyptian Israeli
mechanism to the UN
uh with the UN sort of directly having
the uh the ability and responsibility to
to coordinate the the the
importation uh of of g into Gaza but
that was one of the reasons why the why
the passing of the resolution was
delayed so many times and effectively uh
under the uh under the resolution uh the
uh the current mechanism or whereby
Israel maintains full control over what
gets into Gaza and at what pace is is
kept
unchanged from your experience Lex do
you think that Israel will will comply
with parts of the resolution this whole
resolution what do you
think I mean the the the resolution is a
is a reflection of of the mood of the
International Community and so it's one
of the factors that that I believe
Israel will weigh uh along with uh with
pressure from from from the us uh so far
we have not we we're 70 uh we we're 11
weeks into the war we have an abandons
of Prima fasia evidence of genocide and
ethnic cleansing uh from Gaza and
increasingly also from the West Bank so
far this has not neither uh restrained
Israel nor those governments complicit
and and enabling it to continue its
Onslaught on the on the people in Gaza
so things don't look good from that
perspective okay let's get the
perspective from the Norwegian Refugee
Council uh Ahmed bam let's bring you in
look even if more Aid does go in I mean
unless those trucks and that Aid can
actually move about first of all freely
and then safely then and we understand
from uh Gaza that that's not possible
right now so so what is the point of
this
resolution
um it's a step in the right direction
however it's nowhere uh near um it
doesn't bring us any closer to a
ceasefire which is what we all want to
see ultimately in the aid Community like
you say I have 50 colleagues in in Gaza
they have all being pushed into these
small pockets in Rafa and we are um of
course operating under probably some of
the most impossible circumstances even
by the standards of of the Gaza conflict
even by the standard of of conflict
zones we were there in in Syria and
Yemen in Iraq even in Gaza during
conflicts past conflicts we were always
able to move around and provide Aid this
time we are grounded this time we have
colleagues who have experienced loss in
their families how do you expect Aid
workers to to move around when you know
shelling
bombardment tanks are in your
neighborhood it's we're asking here The
Impossible here evade workers and and we
expect them to to to be superhumans they
are actually as as we speak they are
providing whatever they can the hot
meals and the the potable water that
they can provide and some protection for
for families but you can't do that in in
in a in a in a death zone you know in
probably the largest open air crater in
the world that um you know Israel has
reduced Gaza to yeah I mean you're
asking the question that I was going to
ask you next Ahmed which is how do you
actually have meaningful humanitarian
assistant when the genocide continues
and when the bombs continue to
fall yeah and the answer is we're hardly
scratching the surface here and to be
frank with you um I mean my team are now
split between providing some Aid and you
know installing tents for their extended
families that's the reality of it you
have to wake up in the morning and and
fend for yourself and for your family my
my colleague tells me that you know all
children his children had for a full day
was was a can of food of dry food or
beans um we're asking we're asking the
impossible here and I think anything
short of a lasting ceasefire anything
short of um you know complete lifting of
this Siege 16 years on top of that 70 or
80 80 days now of of a total Siege
nothing else can can you know can can
lead to a solution here and can help aid
workers perform their job Mansour the UN
Secretary General has said that four out
of five of the hungriest people anywhere
in the world are now in Gaza I mean that
is a shocking shocking statistic give us
an idea mansur of tell us what what
people have been telling you what what
you've been seeing on the ground when it
comes to this issue of food and
starvation what amount of food Aid is
entering right now if any at
all yeah I think this is particularly
true especially inaz City and the north
of STP there is hardly any news coming
but whenever we do hear news we hear
news of people actually uh going through
starvation mode um I was actually sent a
video of people trying to make food out
of plants uh from their own ground from
their own soil they do not have any
grains any rice any Wheat
and they're trying to look through
vegetation on the ground to make any
kind of food for themselves there so
this is in particular true for R the
city and the north especially with the
lack of a trucks and and Logistics going
to them up there however in the middle
region and in the South where I am right
now it's a little bit better but like
you said every day it's it's it's uh
it's like a it's like a 12 to 14 hour um
uh mandate you know by the heads of the
families the fathers the mothers uh you
know they have to go and fence for to
have to try to find something to feed
their children they have to try to bake
bread in some kind of clay stove uh they
have to try to get some clean water from
any of the filtration units somewhere
beside them so um it is it is difficult
there is definitely a malnutrition
happening here and again we are not
seeing at least inun the eight TR coming
in maybe it's more in ra because it's
close to the Border but not
inun however hopefully with this UN
resolution a does slowly start tickling
in because especially with flu season
coming with the winter with the cold
people here need to eat well as soon as
possible Lex comment on this issue of uh
the real lack of food and people
starving in Gaza and also the UN has
said that the entire population of Gaza
faces an imminent risk of famine
indeed and and in this respect uh what
is called for Beyond a full sensation of
hostilities uh a comprehensive ceasefire
is also uh beyond the unhindered excess
of international uh of of of
humanitarian supplies also of
international humanitarian workers and
international journalist I mean one of
the big differences with the previous
Wars is that at that time
uh International un colleagues were able
to stay in the
north uh International journalists were
there to monitor the
situation and to to
report in real time on on you know the
humanitarian needs and the and the state
of the of the assault you know in in all
parts of the gasa Street and this is
today not not possible and crucially
needed so uh this is also a call for for
more efforts to get humanitarian
International humanitarian Personnel to
support their local colleagues I lived
in Gaza for a decade and and one
important function of of having
International staff there was was yet to
provide support and protection to our to
our courageous bisan
colleagues um Ahmed organizations like
the like Oxfam has warned that
starvation is being used as a weapon of
of war against civilians in Gaza in an
act of collective punishment does the
NRC share that
assessment yes and um Israel as the
occupier under international law is
responsible for the security and the
food security of the people it occupies
as a um of course Israel as authorities
they they do control areas uh they do
control borders um the the crossing the
B Crossing uh with with with Gaza which
has been the main point of entry for
food over over these uh over these years
um there is another element of it which
is the destruction of agricultural lands
of green houses we have seen this in in
U in rights reports the destruction of
all means of life really I mean there's
probably we can't think of a violation
that hasn't been committed here but of
course the security of the people and
and the food and starvation has been
used of course destruction of destroying
water networks for example that's again
against International humanitarian law
um you know not facilitating the entry
of food to people who are at increased
risk of of starvation that's again
that's one more violation and of course
even businesses and um shops and
supermarkets that have been that that
have been hit here and you know
Strawberry Fields and and Fields that
you know used to feed families and
businesses and small businesses there's
there's hardly you know any violation
you could think of that you know has not
been has not been committed here and you
know when we talk about just a point
here about a trucks that that come into
Gaza we talk about 100 200s 300s not all
of these trucks are actual food uh or or
water or you know um any kind of
sustenance that people need some of them
includes shelter support some of them
medication and so when when when we have
100 trucks coming in a day I mean that
that can that is hardly enough for for a
neighborhood really for a street for a
for a shelter and that's why we have
been saying that the all of this with
the forcible transfer of the people of
residents in Gaza all of this together
constitutes a grave violation of
international law so just on the point
Ahmed on um you saying that the
Norwegian Refugee Council says that
starvation is being used as a weapon of
War having made that assessment and that
declaration what can organizations like
yours do about
it we can only speak out to be honest
and we can only press and pressure um
allies of Israel in the in the the West
internationally in the security Council
to push for more aids to push for more
humanitarian aid while at the same time
pushing for our ceasefire we have been
saying this all along you can't use
water or food or electricity or con
connection even internet which which is
you know we we we also see examples of
starving people of of connectivity in
Gaza which is just just horrific for
people not be able not to be able to
check in and and you know speak to their
families and and confirm that you know
someone is alive or not right all of
this together I mean without the
pressure without International Community
pressuring Israel we're not going to
have a solution to to this um um Ahmed
from Gaza um I'd just like to talk about
the issue of pregnant women for moment
because look there are lot of vulnerable
groups in Gaza of course right now I
mean the entire population is vulnerable
but we're hearing stories of pregnant
women who are at particular risk uh
because um and baby formula cannot be
found and milk of course is in severe
short supply for toddlers who are
relying on it you speak to us from nasad
hospital how are these women coping and
their
children I'm I'm located in a tent right
adjacent to the maternity War here in N
Hospital the wall I'm touching is the
maternity W it houses dozens of of women
in labor and and and babies who have
been delivered and five days ago an
Israeli tank Strike It Strike the third
floor of this maternity World killing
one female and injuring a dozens of uh
women in labor and newborn babies it
didn't kill more because that bomb
didn't explode and I'm trying also to
help a lot in the charity work here and
the number one thing that is needed is
things related to hygiene and things
related to baby food formula so you are
right there is a lack of baby food
formula there is a lack of diapers there
is a lack of woman pads and um and and
the only solution for it since there's
no Manufacturing in Gaza is to import it
to get it from the outside so hopefully
this UN resolution will allow more baby
formula more food more Wom medical needs
to come in as soon as possible to help
to support the civilian population here
on the ground Lex um look as we're
discussing I mean the needs are so
immense and so huge if there is another
humanitarian pause a corridor or or you
know these sort declared safe zones that
turns out are not safe in Gaza the needs
are are so huge are these momentary
pauses enough to be able to supply the
people of Gaza with everything that they
need absolutely not I mean in the face
of as I as I mentioned already the the
abundance of Prima FAS evidence of of
atrocity crimes I mean what is called
for is a complete sensation of
hostilities so that uh indeed the UN can
sort of properly together with its
humanitarian Partners such as the NRC
and many others exercise its its its
responsibilities and and and uh and
reach uh Reach people at all parts of
the of the strip uh as long as this does
not happen and as an international
lawyer I believe it is beyond continuing
diplomatic and political pressure
including from Grassroots I believe it
is critical to use to to now make use of
all available legal Avenues uh to hold
those perpetrating or complicity in the
commission of atrocity you talk about
all legal Avenues what are you referring
to here
yeah what I'm referring to I mean there
is an ongoing investigation by the ICC
we're aware of that and and further
submissions to the ICC and pressure on
the ICC prosecutor Karim Khan is is
critical uh then there is also the
opportunity offered by the genocide
convention uh for uh for states to
engage the international court of
justice including an urgent an urgent
request for provisional measures
uh the why do you think why do you think
that we still haven't seen a state
invoke that genocide convention yet
Lex well one of the main reasons is I
think honestly uh fear of taking on
Israel and uh and uh and by extension
the the the the US and and Europe uh
there 153 States party to the Gen sign
convention they are roughly the same
states that supported the recent General
Assembly resolution uh but but putting
you know expressing expressing a strong
denunciation is one taking legal action
uh there in a court of law and
especially in the world court is uh is
an you know a critical is is quite a
threshold and yet in in in face of the
Prima fasi you know evidence that we are
seeing this critical that you know one
or more of the of the 153 States parties
step up to the this pressure and and and
uh and do the right thing as myar as as
scambia did in in the case of of of
Myanmar with respect to the genocide
against the rohinga and and finally
there is also uh mul a multitude of
avenues through National courts quite
quite a few have already been pursued in
the US in the Netherlands in in the UK
in in Scandinavia but much more can be
done and there is a lot of collaboration
between lawyers around the world and and
and and supported by Palestinian human
rights organization and this is really
really critical at the at the present
time only efforts at accountability can
bring you know restrained by by the
party and and and those complicit in in
in the ongoing genocide okay we'll have
to leave it there on that note thank you
so much for joining us gentlemen Mansour
Shan thank you for joining us from Gaza
Ahmed Bam from Aman and Lex Tak Berg
thank you for joining us from Vienna
thanks for watching you can see the
program again anytime by visiting our
website al.com for further discussion go
to our Facebook page that's
facebook.com/ AJ insidestory join the
conversation on X our handle is AJ insid
story from myself the whole team here in
Doha thanks for watching bye-bye for
[Music]
now
make sure to subscribe to our channel to
get the latest news from Al
jazer click on the